Now that we understand objects and
prototypes,
prototypal inheritance and
the prototype chain, object properties and
methods, it's time to talk more
deeply about building objects.
We've already seen one
way to build objects.
Which is object-literal syntax.
However, there are a few
other ways to build objects,
especially when it comes
to setting the prototype.
So, we're going to look at them now.
First, our first way of building objects.
And we need to understand why
they work the way they do.
This is function constructors,
'new', and the history of JavaScript.
Now, we're not going to get too
deep into a history lesson, but
here's what you need to know.
JavaScript was built by
a guy named Brendon Eich.
Back at the time, when much like today,
there are technology wars between Google
and Apple, there was technology and
programming language wars
between various companies like Netscape,
Microsoft, Oracle and Sun.
And so, JavaScript was
a language that was written for
usage in the browser eventually.
Not absolutely originally.
But eventually that became its purpose,
primarily.
And it was called JavaScript,
to attract Java developers to it.
Because there were a lot
of Java developers, and
if you don't have developers
using a language, it dies.
So, the company that Brandon Eich
worked for at the time
decided to call it JavaScript
to attract Java developers.
Much like at the time Microsoft was
touting a language in the browser called
VBScript, because Visual Basic
was very popular and
it wanted to attract its own
Visual Basic developers to VBScript.
So JavaScript sounds like Java and
looks a little like Java,
but is nothing like Java.
This is marketing.
And one of the elements of marketing
JavaScript was this kind of line of code.
Java developers were used to
creating objects like this,
using the new keyword and
something called a class.
A class in Java is not an object but
it defines an object and
you use the new keyword to then
create the object from that class.
JavaScript doesn't really have classes
although there is a class keyword
coming In the next version of JavaScript,
but even then that isn't really a class
the way it is in Java or C# or C++.
So, Java developers were used
to creating objects like this.
And so JavaScript needed a way
to be able to create objects
with this kind of syntax, so
that when Java developers looked at
JavaScript, they would say, oh see,
JavaScript is like Java.
You should use it,
even though it's not really.
So what we have and what we still have in
JavaScript is one approach to building
objects that isn't that bad when you get
down to it, once you get used to it.
But it does have some problems.
However, even though there are new ways
coming to build objects in JavaScript,
this is one of those things you need
to know because its ubiquitous.
It's everywhere and it will be in a lot
of the open source that you might read or
other projects that you might get involved
in if you're writing JavaScript or
reading someone else's.
So, let's talk about function
constructors and the keyword new.
So, let's create a new function.
I'm going to call it Person.
And then, I'm gonna do
something kind of interesting.
I'm going to set
this.firstname = 'John' and
this.lastname = 'Doe'.
And that's that.
And then I'm going to stop for
a moment and create
a new object using this new operator,
the new keyword.
And it will explain what it's
doing once we see what it does.
So I'll say new Person.
Notice I'm not just calling the function.
I'm not just invoking it.
I'm putting the new
keyword in front of it.
And then, let's console.log(john).
Let's see what we get.
I have an object that is a person with its
first name John and its last name Doe.
So what just happened here?
Well, remember that everything we're
going to talk about in this section
is just about different
ways to construct objects.
We're not changing what objects are or
how they work.
We're simply utilizing features in
the JavaScript language that lets us
Construct or build objects.
To build objects we need to create
an object, give it properties and
methods, and set its prototype.
We set the prototype the wrong
way in the previous lesson
just to show how it worked.
But now we're going into the right ways or
the various ways that are accepted
to create objects in JavaScript,
adding properties, adding methods,
and setting the prototype.
So, the new keyword, which we said was
basically introduced to make Java and
similar language developers feel
comfortable, is actually an operator.
Remember, our JavaScript
operator precedence list?
You can see that new is
actually an operator.
So, when we say new
something special happens.
Immediately, an empty object is created.
It would be as if we said, var and then
some variable and then an empty object.
An empty object is created.
And then it invokes the function.
It calls the function.
When the function is called
we know that the execution
context generates for
us a variable called this.
In this case,
in the case where you use the keyword new,
it changes what the this
variable points to.
The this variable points
to that new empty object.
Imagine basically that this operator
creates an empty object and
then calls this function.
So now the this variable is pointing
to that empty object in memory
that this new operator created.
Now when I add .firstname and .lastname,
I'm adding it to that empty object.
And as long as this function, the function
that I used the new operator on,
doesn't return a value, the JavaScript
engine will return that object that
was created by the new operator.
So it created a new object,
then called the function with the this
variable pointing to that empty object.
And then whatever I do to that empty
object using the this variable
will end up as part of that object and
that's what's returned.
Let's prove for
starters that this is being invoked.
This function is invoked.
All right, let's see what we get.
Yep.
It invoked the function, and
then returned this object.
If I didn't do anything to this at all,
what I would end up with
is what this is originally.
This keyword.
What is it?
It's an empty object.
It knows it's a type of person but
it's an empty object.
And then I started adding properties and
methods to it.
See that?
And that's returned.
If I had returned something else like,
greeting: 'i got in the way'.
That's what would get
returned from the function.
I would essentially be getting in the way
of that JavaScript engine process.
But if I don't return anything,
the JavaScript engine says, okay,
you invoked this function
using the new operator, so
I'm going to give you back the object
that was set as the this variable
before the function started executing,
when the execution context was created.
See that?
So this is letting me construct
an object via a function.
So we call a function that's used
specifically to construct an object
a function constructor.
Makes sense, right?
Now I know what you might be thinking.
You might be thinking but
what if I want to just create more people
with the same properties and methods?
What happens?
If I refresh this,
you'll see that our first invocation
using the new operator works,
and so does our second.
It's invoked again, so
a different empty object is created.
The function is run, and that empty
object is work on inside the function and
returned, although we have one problem.
The first and
last name always have these values.
I can make that work a little better
by remembering something very
important about function constructors.
Function constructors are just functions.
We haven't really changed how functions
work by calling the new operator.
The important things are that putting
the new operator in front of a function
sets the this keyword to
a brand new empty object, and
if you don't return anything
from that function,
instead of returning undefined it
will return that empty object, but
now worked on by you perhaps inside
that function using the this keyword.
Make sense?
So if I want first name and last name to
be whatever I want it to be when I invoke
the function, I just set parameters.
So I can set firstname, lastname and
then you'll usually see
a pattern that looks like this.
Again, the this keyword is pointing
to an empty object in memory.
So, I'm saying, whatever I passed to
the function, set that value as the value
of this new property on my empty object
that was created by the new keyword.
So here I could do John and
Doe for firstname, lastname, and
here I could do Jane and
Doe for firstname, lastname.
Each invocation of the function using
the new operator invokes the function but
first creates a new empty object.
These are going to be
different empty objects.
Then work is done using the this keyword,
if you like.
Then as long as you don't have a return
statement, the JavaScript engine will
return that empty object which
you have now likely manipulated.
Added properties.
Added methods.
That object sitting in that space
created by the new keyword.
And you can use parameters just
like you would any other function.
So in most cases with function
constructors, you're passing some default
values or
set values to set as part of the object.
So you'll usually see a pattern like this.
I use the parameters of the function
to tell the function how to construct.
Or what values to place when
it's constructing the object.
This part right here,
it's adding the property.
And this right here is
the parameter that I passed in.
And you could name these
differently if you wanted.
But, this is usually the pattern that
we see because it's very clean and
easy to understand what property
goes with what parameter.
Does that make sense?
So if I run this, notice that the first
new Person is invoked the new
operator creates a new object,
then the function is invoked here, and
then I added my firstname and lastname
using the values I passed to the function.
Then I called new person again,
got a different empty object and
what I ended up with was an object with
the same properties but different values
because I used the values of the
parameters that I passed to the function.
So this is still just calling a function,
no different, but by putting the new
keyword in front of it, it's changed what
happens with this and what's returned.
So now I'm constructing
objects using functions.
And again that's a function constructor.
So, big word alert, function constructors.
Not that complex after all.
A normal function that is
used to construct objects.
When you put that new keyword in front
of a function call, the 'this' variable,
which is created during the creation
phase of the execution context,
it points to a brand new empty object.
And that object is returned
from the function automatically
when the function finishes execution.
All right.
So that's function constructors,
used for constructing objects.
Really, the new operator
makes the new object.
And function constructors are used for
adding properties and
methods to that new object.
All right, so that gets us the new
properties and the new methods, but
what about setting the prototype?
All right, when it comes to setting
the prototype with function constructors,
it's actually quite easy, but
looks a little confusing.
That's next.